# HU-RIZON
Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is a major challenge for humanity since up to 10 million people are predicted to die annually from diseases caused by AMR pathogens by 2050. AMR genes and strains are known to spread between animals, humans and environment. While many studies quantify these in separate niches, no study fully tracks the transmission nor the source-sink dynamics of resistance genes. Of particular concern is the spread of AMR via birds that travel long distances. Here we focus on some of the longest-distant migrant birds and seek to establish their role in spreading AMR with special reference to Hungary, a country centred in a global migratory pathway.

In five work packages (WPs) we will sample the gut microbiome from wild and domesticated (i.e. poultry) birds, and humans (W-P-H) and to quantify the frequency of resistant alleles. Using state-of-the-art meta-genomic analyses, we will identify pathogens and AMR genes. WP-1 and -2 will sample and compare metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGS) from W-P-H using cultured clinical microbiological samples and a cutting-edge database infrastructure. In WP-3 we will focus on pathogens of major public health impact, including all ESKAPE and WHO AMR pathogens. We will quantify temporal and spatial variation in genes and SNPs associated with different sources, including host segregating markers and AMR genes. WP-4 will use probabilistic attribution models to quantify source transitions between H-P-W based on segregating genomic markers using new machine learning tools for identifying reservoirs to human infection. Finally, WP-5 will use local and global sampling across One Health settings to model transmissions and pinpoint efficient intervention points.

This much-needed approach brings an ecological perspective into AMR research and will exchange key skills between PARTNERS, produce top publications, form capacities, train early-career scientists and advise intervention policies in Hungary, across Europe and worldwide.
